hello my name is tim hirsch i'm deputy director
at gbiff the global biodiversity information
facility i'm going to take a few minutes to give
you a basic introduction to gbiff who we are
what we do and why we do it hopefully it will give
a bit of context to the rest of this training and
motivate you to use the skills you'll be acquiring
in this course to support gbiff's mission
so what is gbif well we're an intergovernmental
network and research infrastructure with the
overall purpose of providing anyone anywhere with
free and open access to data about all types of
life on earth gbif was established in 2001 and
it's a voluntary collaboration among governments
and international organizations the gbif
participants working through a common
memorandum of understanding or mou this mou sets
out the basic principles of sharing data for the
common good and the way gbif should be governed
and funded under the mou each gbif participant
agrees to set up a node to coordinate data sharing
and use among stakeholders in the country or
organization a secretariat based in copenhagen
denmark manages the technical infrastructure
and supports the collaborations that keep
gbif going and growing as a global community
as you'll see from the gbiff.org homepage on the
right this community is now managing very large
volumes of data shared from hundreds of publishing
institutions around the world and used in a
growing body of research to support understanding
and decisions relating to biodiversity
one way to look at gbiff is as a window
on the huge amount of evidence accumulated
over centuries about where species have lived
and when they lived there the evidence takes
many different forms and often starts out
scattered isolated and inaccessible here are
some examples and you can follow this if you look
at the semicircle on the left starting at the top
and working anti-clockwise specimens literally
billions of them collected from around the world
along with the labels that describe them contain
vital evidence which may be literally locked away
in the drawers of natural history collections
observations from surveys and monitoring
programs as well as the increasing activities
of citizen scientists are recorded and stored
in varying formats literature about the natural
world both historic and current often contains
detailed information on species occurrences but
it's embedded and effectively hidden in the text
it needs liberating automated wildlife records
such as through satellite tracking camera traps
or acoustic monitoring add yet more to this
wealth of evidence and finally large volumes of
data derived from dna sequencing of samples from
the environment so called edna provide evidence
of previously hidden biodiversity the key to
discovering and applying all of this evidence
is the use of common standards a common language
if you like that organizes all the essential
facts according to an agreed vocabulary even if
they started out in a mess of different formats
that's one of the things you'll be
learning much more about in this course
once organized using agreed standards data sets
can be shared or published through gbiff and using
the technical infrastructure of the network easily
discovered by users through filtered searches
plotted on maps and used in models always
with clear links back to the original evidence
so we've brought all of this data together but
for what purpose through tracking the citations
of gbif in research and its onward relevance to
policy and decisions we can build up a picture of
how all of those involved in sharing standardized
data from the volunteer wildlife observer to
researchers and museum curators are contributing
to the knowledge that supports better decisions
for our planet and for our societies here are just
some examples data shared through gbif supports
conservation by helping to identify
the most important sites for protected
areas by underpinning assessment of species
extinction risk through the red listing process
and by tracking the actual and predicted spread
of invasive alien species data shared through gmif
supports food security by mapping the distribution
of the wild relatives of the most important food
crops and therefore the location of the genetic
resources that need to be conserved for future
plant breeding and by providing information on
both marine and freshwater fish species along with
other wild species important for nutrition data
shared through gbiff supports action on climate
change through helping to model how species ranges
will change under different climate scenarios
informing strategies to adapt to climate change
and assessing the impacts of measures to mitigate
climate change for example increased production
of biofuels and hydropower and finally
data shared through gbif supports human health
by tracking the distribution of species that
act as vectors hosts and reservoirs of human
diseases by helping to map medicinal plant species
and by assessing risks posed by significant
public health hazards such as snake bite
gpiff provides technical solutions but it is above
all a global community its people collaborating
to develop skills and good practices in the
management sharing and use of biodiversity data
this biodiversity informatics community
of practice has over the years generated
a variety of tools and guidance materials which
are all freely available through the gbif network
increasingly in multiple languages at the heart of
this collaboration is training through the use of
curricular and e-learning like the course you're
following now another key feature is the use of
our growing pool of volunteer mentors experienced
gbif practitioners who help new colleagues to
get started with advice and technical guidance
today's trainees soon become tomorrow's mentors
and so the community of practice grows g this
network of nodes helps develop these skills
both within a country's institutions and
through collaboration at regional and
global levels through a range of programs
and partnerships gbif brings funding into
projects that enhance biodiversity informatics
capacity among countries and institutions
so welcome to the gbif community and good luck if
you have questions on this presentation please use
the forum provided in the e-learning platform this
video is part of a series of presentations used in
the gbif biodiversity data mobilization course
the curriculum for this course was originally
developed as part of the biodiversity information
for development program the bid program funded
by the european union this presentation
was created and narrated by me tim hirsch